Here's again another fragment shader and
this one is just
taking in the these two sliders
here one of them is the color,
which is a defined here as a hex code but
in the shader,
it has to be somehow turned into vec3.
So when we use three js and we use color,
we're using RGB which is between 0 and 1.
Well, it's the same thing here with color,
so this is a 3D vector,
which is between 0 and 1 for
orange GNB and then we have opacity here.
And so let's say we wanted to try and make
the pixels of this quad a different color.
So let's just try and edit it here.
The first thing we need to do is
we need to use this gl_FragColor.
This is the output of a fragment shader.
The output is a vec4, so
it's RGBA red, green, blue, alpha.
And so we could just do vec4
is equal to some number.
So now we have a FragColor that is 0.5 for
all the components, for red,
green, blue, and alpha.
So it's a bit semi-transparent
because our alpha's 0.5,
it's a bit gray because we're using 0.5.
So maybe we wanna make it red.
So we're gonna say inside, were gonna
do 1.0, 0.0, 0.0 for the RGB and
then pure opacity of one for the opacity.
So now we've just made it red and
if we were using properties
from our JavaScript programs we would
be using this thing called uniforms.
So uniform,
this is a special type of property
that we can't assign it a value here.
So I can't just say,
I want it to be right up here.
You're gonna get an error.
It's gonna say cannot initialize
this type of qualifier.
It's gonna say uniform
can't be initialized,
we can't initialize
a uniform from the shader.
Instead, the uniforms are read only.
They're coming in from
the JavaScript somewhere.
So the JavaScript is passing those
down into the fragment shader and
saying here's the value of color.
But the the shader can't
change this value.
If you wanted to have a constant,
you could say like const vec3.
MyColor = vec3, some values.
So this is how you could do a constant but
this value is not gonna change, right?
And so we can't hook up like a slider
to it, we can't hook up animations and
stuff to it,
it's always going to just be one.
And so the purpose of uniforms is to
get access of stuff from JavaScript.
So let's say from the dom, whether
we're doing a slider, or maybe from
something else, and to pass that
information down to the fragment shader.
And the reason it's
called uniform is because
because the value that
we're getting is uniformly,
the same across every single
pixel in this fragment shader.
That's why it's called uniform.
So it's not changing across
the different pixels.
So color let's say right now we have the
color is set to this this red value here,
which is 255420 or some similar value
if we were to normalize that to 0 to 1.
Well that color's not changing across
the entire surface of this quad.
That's why it's called uniform.
So uniform is one thing and
then in vertex shaders,
I'm just going back to
mention this other thing.
So we again see uniforms which means
whenever you see uniforms just imagine is
coming from JavaScript.
So that stretch value is
coming from JavaScript, and
these sort of matrix transformations
are coming from JavaScript as well.
And this is what's defining the camera and
the way
that the object is positioned as
defining the way that the camera's
actually projecting whether it's
isometric or orthographic or perspective.
So those things we don't
really need to worry so
much about what they mean other than
the fact that they contain the data and
they contain the information
about how to transform this mesh.
But then there's this other thing that I
haven't mentioned yet which is attribute.
So attribute is different than uniform.
It's not coming from like a slider or
something like that, but it's actually
coming from the vertex data that's
contained in each of these vertices.
So remember when I was talking
before lunch about vertices and
I'll just real quickly
show you in this demo.
So let's say in the geometry demo or
the buffer geometry demo we
have these vector threes and
each of these it's a position attribute so
here we have a position attribute
that's defining the Vertex positions.
We could add other attributes like the
colour, we could add texture coordinates,
we could add random numbers if we wanted
to create some random displacement in
the geometry, and that's the attribute.
So it's coming from the actual geometry
of the mesh that we're working with.
And if we're doing buffer geometry,
we can add in custom attributes.
So you could have a new attribute
that would say, myCord and
it could be some vec3 or it could
be a float or something like that.
You just have to declare it just
in the way we've been declaring
the position attribute in
the buffer geometry example.
Okay, one last little thing
is to understand how shaders
are different in three js, as opposed
to in pure WebGL or pure OpenGL.
So so far, these shader examples have been
including a few things like precision
highp float, and I've included a couple of
uniform things like the transformations.
Well, when we write shaders in three js,
we can simplify them a little bit.
We don't specify precision highp float,
we just go straight to the main function.
And then we don't need to specify
the transformation uniforms,
we can just write our code.
So this is a vertex shader now and
it's a little bit simpler.
And this is the fragment shader.
Once again no precision specifiers.
So this is three js giving us some
utility here, some convenience.
Making it just a bit easier to
right away start writing shaders,
not having to worry about them.
And so this code actually that you're
seeing, you could copy and paste this into
your scene that you have with the earth,
and it would just create the same setup.
Because all of a sudden,
we've created a shader material just
by doing this these several
lines of code here.
We have the vertex shader as a string,
we have the fragment shader as a string,
and then we have the material which
combines these two shaders, which says
here's the vertex shader and here's the
fragment shader, it's a shader material.
And then the third thing here
is this idea of uniforms.
I kept saying it's coming from JavaScript,
and that's because this
is where we define it.
We define it in JavaScript as an object.
And so
if we wanted to say the opacity is 0.5
we can define this object
here with the value,
this is just this kind of weird
syntax that three js enforces.
It's an object with value.
And then now that we've
defined it as a uniform,
we can use that uniform
in our fragment shader.
And so I can start to use that maybe
multiplying the color by opacity or
something like that.
And you'll see how changing
the value in JavaScript in this JS
object is gonna change the output.
And so really, you would actually want to
use this opacity in the alpha component of
a FragColor.
But one thing you might
notice is that if I use this.
It looks pretty good actually.
But sometimes what you'll need to do is,
you'll need to also specify that
your material is transparent by
just saying transparent true.
It's just something to notice a bit
of a gotcha is that in three js by
default objects are opaque.
And that's because it's a little bit
more efficient to render opaque objects.
But if you have an object
that has some transparency,
you're going to want to
put in transparent true.
And there's one other thing I want
to mention was this snippets,
which is in the webgl glsl repo in
the guides, or also in the links here.
If you scroll down snippet
using the workshop.
So this kind of basic fragment and
basic vertex shader, you can copy and
paste this if you're forgetting what to
write and you can use this as a base.
It includes the few things that
I haven't talked about yet
which we'll talk about later in
the afternoon called varyings.
But for now, you can just copy and
paste it or you can copy and
paste the ones from the guidebook
that would also work.